This video is sponsored by protonmail. 

Looking to cut out Google from your life? Protonmail is a Swiss-based email
provider that offers up an intuitive and private alternative to Gmail.  They
don't run tracking JavaScript on their homepage and they open source their web
app over on GitHub. You'll also be able to store and send encrypted emails to
other protonmail users.  I've been a premium subscriber for over a year now,
and I've been quite happy with them. If you're interested in their services,
I've got a referral link in the description below. 

Open source technology (the code used to build applications) has revolutionized
the software engineering profession.  Most of the websites you visit (Facebook,
Amazon, Google, etc.) are hosted on servers that run Linux. Most major
programming utilies are open source, such as the popular GCC compiler for C and
C++, or OpenJDK for Java. Chances are, you'll interact with products created by
these technologies in your day to day life without even realizing it. Did you
know that your Android phone is powered by Linux? How about the New York Stock
Exchange? Even video game development heavily utilizes free software, such as
developers creating 3D models in Blender or using dedicated linux servers for
multiplayer. 

So with all of that shared tech in the wild, where are all of the libre games?
For the most part, AAA studios and indie developers do not release their engine
or game source code on a regular basis. With that in mind, examine why the
gaming landscape is like this, make a case for why we need more open source
games.


Part 0: Potential Problems.

A disclaimer. These opinions are just that, opinions. They're not meant as
statements of fact. 

#1 Control. 

Personally, I think this is the most important reason, especially in the modern
gaming industry.  With AAA studios pushing games as a service and
microtransactions, these companies are financially incentivized to take away
control from the user. You want that shiny new weapon skin that your opponent
just killed you with? Better buy some loot boxes and hope that's what you get.
Giving players access to the source code of the game would work directly
against these companies' interests, as a talented programmer could
strip out microtransactions and fork the project. 

#2 Middleware

On a more technical side,middleware (such as Havok, Speedtree and FMOD) usually
have more complex licensing terms than free software projects. Now, as a game
developer, try to imagine releasing the source code to your title when using a
lot of middleware. It becomes an absolute nightmare, as you have scour through
license after license, making sure you don't violate any legal agreements. As a
result, it often makes little economic sense to navigate around this
labyrinthian mess, especially when financial penalties can be severe.  We can
actually see an example of a developer's mistake with the source code release
of Star Wars Jedi Knight 2 by Raven Software.  Initially released under GPLv2,
the project was taken off of Sourceforge when it was discovered that the
licensed Bink Video code wasn't redacted. Thankfully, there still exists a
community fork, so Jedi Knight 2's source has not been lost to the public.

#3 Release Model

Games follow a unique release model in the software world. Rather than
iterating on a single piece of tech over time, companies opt to release new
games constantly. As redditor Architector4 points out, "you could've used
Blender for the last 20 years and still find it useful [today], but it'd
probably get boring playing the same game for 20 years." The gaming industry
evolves over time, and trying incorporate each new trend as it appears into
your game just results in development hell, such as the case of Duke Nukem
forever.  Thus, teams work on games for a few years, provide short-term patches
and DLC, and move onto their next project, though games as a service is
starting to change this release model. 

Another thing to consider is how little objectivity there is in game
development. Within the realm of a typical fortune 500 business, software is
designed to address a set of specified requirements and use cases. Can the
software adapt to user error and prevent it from causing major system damage?
Can the software parse information so that it can be easily stored in a SQL
database? These are generally simple yes or no questions.

But games are inherently subjective, a reflection of the vision that the
designers had at the time. How does the game "feel"? Are the controls "tight"
or "loose"? Is the combat loop "engaging"? Depending on who you ask, the answer
can easily change. As redditor Odostolon points out, "with games being so much
a matter of taste, it's much more difficult to agree on a feature set. [It's]
hard to coordinate".

So, with all of these in mind, it's not hard to see why most titles end up
being proprietary releases. 

Part 1: Why do we care?

But why should we care that we don't have the source code to the end product?
Who really needs to be able to compile games for themselves?

Well, for me, it comes down to one major concern: video game preservation. 

I think there's a real danger of permanently losing games with the shift to an
increasingly online-centric world. What happens if the company goes bankrupt or
the servers get taken offline? Past the cutoff date, we'll never be able to
play these games ever again. 

Here are two such examples that are now lost to history.

Released back in 2011, Darkspore was a Sci-Fi Action RPG styled in the vein of
Diablo. While nothing unique, it was a fun little romp that shared the original
Spore's impressive creature creator. However, the game utilized always-online
DRM, with no option for offline play. As a result, when the game's servers shut
down in 2016, Darkspore became effectively unplayable. The server code was
never released, nor were the servers reverse engineered by the community.  So
to this day, almost 4 years later, owners of Darkspore can still not play the
game. 

Released on August 8, 2017, Lawbreakers aimed to be the Dark Souls of online
multiplayer FPS games, marking the return of legendary game developer Cliff
Bleszinski.  Unfortunately, the game's sales never matched its critical
reception, and the online playerbase whithered down into nearly nothing. Like
Darkspore, Lawbreakers had no offline play, lacking bots or a LAN mode. So when
the servers shut down on September 2018, another game became lost to the mists
of time.  And with the server code still out of public access, there's not much
we can do. 

It seems like this trend is continuing, as more "high profile" games will
receive the axe, notably former Overwatch competitor Battleborn, which will see
its servers shut down on January 2021. 

Gaming is an inherently digital medium. So long as the source code to a product
exists, it can be built and run on practically any computer that meets it
requirements. This is in stark contrast to a lot of movies and music, which
were stored on physical film and master tapes until recently. And history's not
been kind to these, as thousands of these have been lost to fires throughout
the years. 

We're in a unique situation where nearly every game can be preserved without
much physical effort, yet the industry as a whole chooses not to do, preferring
to pursue short-term gain. Even if many of these titles are unremarkable, I
still want a future generation to be able to look back on and study them to
better understand our evolving culture before we permanently lose these games. 

Part 2 Conclusion:

Overall, the situation around open source games is troubling. While I
understand that it's difficult to navigate through the legal tape and there's
little financial incentive for companies to open their code, I think it's
important to preserve the legacy of video games as an evolving medium. I'm
hoping more people realize that before we permanently lose any more titles.

That you very much for watching. This video was rather near and dear to my
heart, and I really loved making this project. The next video will be a review
on Jamestown Plus, and I've been thinking about starting a new series of
mini-game recommendations. Of course, with my schedule being a complete mess,
who knows what will come out when. I certainly don't. For channel
announcements, you can follow me on Twitter @SquidTheSid1, or hit up the
Squidcord discord server.  If you'd like to be removed of any guilt from using
an adblocker, you can financially support this channel on YouTube or Patreon.
Every little bit of help puts me one step closer towards realizing this dream. 

As always, stay frosty. 

